>> As you extricate yourself
from these identities,
from these roles, you learn
how to wear roles, to use them,
to function within them.
You and I have to
meet through role.
The question is how you can
be in a role and not of it.
How you can be in the role?
Like I'm lecturing,
and you're audience.
But you don't have to be
busy being an audience.
I'm not speaking.
You're not audience.
We're just beings
being together.
And it just happens the
vehicle for us being together
is this speaking
and this listening.
The minute you
become the listener,
you make me the speaker.
The minute you identify
with your role,
you make me an object.
The minute you don't
identify with your role
and I don't identify with
my role, how many of us
are there anyway?
There's only one of it.
There's one of it playing
with these different forms.
So that as you get into
meditative practice,
you begin to examine
what roles you're really
caught in needing.
And you begin to feel where the
aversions and the attractions
are in your own mind.
That's the whole
process of meditation,
is to extricate yourself
from these clingy things that
are models and habits of
thought and definitions.
Until they come
very, very lightly.
If I'm representing
the Seva Foundaion,
I am a foundation
representative.
But when I'm lying
around in the hot tub,
I'm not a foundation
representative.
I'm somebody lying
in the hot tub.
And I move from moment
to moment to moment.
And Gandhi gave
that little story
that I've told so many times.
It's so powerful for
us in this culture.
When he was leading
a march, and he saw
there was going to be
violence, and he said
he was going to stop the march.
And the people, his
lieutenants said,
you can't do this, Gandhi.
People left their
jobs to follow you.
There's thousands
of people involved.
And he said, God
is absolute truth.
I am a human.
I only know relative truth.
And my understanding of truth
changes from day to day.
And my commitment must be to
truth, not to consistency.
Now you just look
at your life and ask
how much is your commitment
to consistency and not truth?
How much in order to
make it all run smooth
are you just who everybody
expects you to be all the time?
How consistent are we?
How afraid are we
of inconsistency?
Now, to be truthful, does it
mean to appear inconsistent?
The answer is no.
Because once you
know you're nobody,
then you can be anybody.
Then you can be
consistent all the time
because it doesn't
matter to you.
But as long as you think you're
somebody and you're consistent,
you're trapped.
So what I'm experiencing is
the less I define myself,
the more available I am
to other human beings.
The less I am living within
the box of my self-definition
that constantly
uses the universe
to reassure me of who I am,
then the more flexible I am.
So that am I a student,
or am I a teacher?
So the spiritual
journey is really
going into nobody training.